{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\upr{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset256\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset256\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}}{\*\ud{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset256\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset256\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}}}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive \cf2 SYS_HYPERTEXT;}{\s16\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright \fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10 page number;}}{\info{\author Informatics}{\operator Informatics}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy23\hr10\min31}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy23\hr10\min31}{\printim\yr1998\mo8\dy19\hr20\min35}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages7}{\nofwords1304}{\nofchars7438}{\*\company The Jackson Laboratory}{\nofcharsws9134}{\vern99}}\margl1440\margr1440 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\ftnrestart\aftnnar\hyphcaps0\viewkind4\viewscale100 \fet0\sectd \sbknone\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\footer \pard\plain \s16\qr\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpg\phpg\posx5544\posy15120\absw576\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024 2}}}{\cs17 \par }\pard \s16\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright {\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1 {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1 {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1 {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1 {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1 {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1 {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1 {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1 {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1 }\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\f1\fs24 \par \par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\adjustright {\f1\fs24 \tab \par \par \tab \par \tab \tab \tab \tab \par \par }\pard \qc\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\adjustright {\f1\fs24 Putative assignment of ESTs to the genetic map by use of  the SSLP database\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\adjustright {\f1\fs24 \tab \par }\pard \qc\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\adjustright {\f1\fs24 Bruce J. Herron, George H. Silva and Lorraine Flaherty\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\adjustright {\f1\fs24 \tab \par Molecular Genetics Program and Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY 12201-2002 and the Department of Biomedical Sciences, State University of New York at Albany.\par \par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\adjustright {\f1\fs24 Please send correspondence to:\par }\pard \fi-5760\li5760\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\adjustright {\f1\fs24 Lorraine Flaherty\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \par Wadsworth Center\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\adjustright {\f1\fs24 120 New Scotland Avenue\par P.O. Box 22002\par Albany, NY 12201-2002\par FAX 518-474-3181\par E-mail: flaherty@wadsworth.org\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \page \sect }\sectd \sbknone\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\footer \pard\plain \s16\qr\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\pvpg\phpg\posx5544\posy15120\absw576\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\field{\*\fldinst {\cs17 PAGE  }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024 6}}}{\cs17 \par }\pard \s16\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright {\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\f1\fs24 \par \par \tab Simple sequence length polymorphisms  (SSLPs) have generally been found by examining length differences in short tandem repeat sequences, such as dinucleotide repeats }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  MACROBUTTON endnote+.cit }{\f1\fs24 (Tautz 1989)}}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24 .   These repeat sequences are widely distributed throughout many mammalian genomes and can vary greatly in length, making them ideal sources of genetic diversity.  In addition, their small size makes them amenable to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  MACROBUTTON endnote+.cit }{\f1\fs24 (Saiki et al. 1988)}}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24 .  \par \tab Flanking sequences of SSLPs have been found in several expressed transcripts }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  MACROBUTTON endnote+.cit }{\f1\fs24 (Aitman et al. 1991; Hearne et al. 1991; Love et al. 1990)}}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24 . For example, in early work, Love et al (1990) described 50 such markers in the mouse genome that were identified by screening the EMBL database for mouse sequences containing simple repeats.   Since then, thousands more mouse SSLPs have been described, mainly a result of work performed at MIT (see}{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  GOTOBUTTON BM_1_ }}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24  http://www\_genome.wi.mit.edu/).\par \tab The EST (expressed sequence tags) database (dbEST)}{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  MACROBUTTON endnote+.cit }{\f1\fs24 (Boguski et al. 1993)}}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24  at the National Center for Biotechnology Information now contains more than 1.5 million sequences (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/index.html).  Since many of these transcribed sequences represent functional gene transcripts, their mapping could have importance in identifying disease-causing genes by positional cloning procedures.  Thus, we have performed a more systematic search for the overlap between EST sequences and the flanking sequences of SSLPs in both the non-redundant division of Genbank (NR) and dbEST databases.\tab  This information can then be used to map additional ESTs.\par \tab SSLP sequence data  and marker files were obtained from http://www.genome.wi.mit.edu/ftp/distribution/mouse_sslp_release/.}{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  GOTOBUTTON BM_2_ }}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24   Several programs were written in Perl 5.03 to aid in the searching and masking of sequences.  \par \tab First, the markers data file (markers.txt) was scanned for all those SSLPs containing a comment in the column labeled \ldblquote gene\rdblquote , indicating that they had been previously identified as part of a gene; these were excluded from the search set.  If sequences had multiple entries in the sequence data file (sequence.txt), only the first sequence was included in the final data set.  Remaining sequences were collated into a single data file in FASTA format }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  MACROBUTTON endnote+.cit }{\f1\fs24 (Pearson and Lipman 1988)}}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24 .  \par \tab Repeatmasker (http://ftp.genome.washington.edu/RM/RepeatMasker.html)}{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  GOTOBUTTON BM_3_ }}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24  was then used to mask all parts of sequences that contained repetitive elements.  The -mus option was used to mask repetitive elements like LINE and SINE and the -lib option was used to mask sequences matching M13 and polylinker sequences.\tab The sequence files were then compared to the dbEST database with the experimental BLAST server and the GCG implementation of BLAST (Genetics Computer Group, Madison, WI). \par \tab In searching for matches, an e value of 10 and a nucleotide minimum match length (word size)  of 11 were used.  The e value equals the expected frequency of a chance occurrence and is described in detail in the BLAST manual (http://www2.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast_help.html). \par \tab Results were then evaluated for all matches with a sum probability of less than 1x10E-7 and an alignment score of greater than 200.  Sequences meeting these criteria were saved and reviewed manually to confirm the success of the masking programs.  If any alignments were due to  repetitive sequences, they were eliminated at this stage.  \par \tab Next, alignments were examined for their extent of identity to mouse, rat, or human sequences.  Alignments with less than 95% identity to mouse sequences and with less than 80% identity to rat or human sequences were eliminated.  In addition, sequences contained in the NR division of the Genbank database at NCBI were searched with similar criteria. }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  GOTOBUTTON BM_4_ }}{\fldrslt }}{\f1\fs24 \par \tab A total of 6286 SSLP flanking sequences was compared to the NR and dbEST databases.   In this two-stage selection process, 107 (77 mouse, 15 rat, and 18 human) of the 6286 sequences were identified as meeting our criteria (Tables 1 and 2).  To validate our results, we examined previous mapping data available for the identified sequences, as well as investigated if these sequences were members of Unigene clusters .  In the 41 sequences that have been previously mapped in the mouse or other species, 95% agreed with previous map assignments.   However, two sequences, D8Mit99 and D8Mit269, mapped to other than expected locations.   Both of these sequences gave values that were on the borderline of our match criteria (scores of 200 and 205, respectively) with accompanying low P values (4.90E-08, 2.9E-09, respectively).  Each of these sequences would be eliminated by increasing our low limit for inclusion to a score of 210.  This higher limit would only exclude one other gene from our collection (M. musculus mRNA for testin). \par \tab  In this analysis, there were approximately 100 ESTs (data not shown) and/or genes that met our initial criteria (score and P value) but, in the second stage, failed to show more than 95% homology with a mouse sequence (or more than 80% homology to a human or rat sequence).  The majority of these eliminated matches were due to homology to low copy repeats, pseudogenes, and multigene family members, as witnessed by a manual inspection of the match data.\par \tab Because this procedure maps human and rat genes/ESTs as well as mouse genes/ESTs to SSLP locations, it provides a framework for examining homology relationships.  Thus, human ESTs can easily be mapped to the homologous regions in the mouse.  In this study 33 non-mouse sequences were mapped to mouse SSLP locations and have provided anchors between the rat, mouse and human genetic maps. As the total number of expressed sequences in dbEST increases, it may be possible to find more mouse SSLPs which overlap them.\par \par }{\i\f1\fs24 Acknowledgments. }{\f1\fs24 This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants AI12603, and MH58559.\par \par \par \par }\pard \nowidctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \sect }\sectd \marglsxn1350\margtsxn990\sbknone\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\f1\fs24 Table 1.  Genes found by BLAST comparisons of SSLP and dbEST/NR sequences. \par Abbreviations used: Accession, accession number in either NR or dbEST database; Sp, species where sequence was derived; M, mouse; H, human; R, rat; Chr; chromosome.   \par }{\f1\fs24\super \tab a}{\f1\fs24 Single asterisk indicates that SSLP flanking sequence matches a DNA sequence in NR and dbEST sequence and only the sequence with the higher score is listed.  \par \tab }{\f1\fs24\super b}{\f1\fs24 When number is preceded by Hu or Ra, the chromosomal origin was deduced by maps of mouse/human or mouse/rat homologies, respectively.  \par \par }\pard \nowidctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \sect }\sectd \marglsxn1350\margtsxn630\margbsxn810\sbknone\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\f1\fs24 \tab  \par \par Table 2. Summary of matches found in mouse, human, and rat sequences.\par }\pard \fi-2070\li2070\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1086\tx-720\tx-90\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\adjustright {\f1\fs24 \tab \tab  \tab  }{\f1\fs24\ul \tab                 Number of matches in                    }{\f1\fs24 \par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright {\f1\fs24\ul Database\tab \tab mouse\tab \tab human\tab rat\tab \tab total}{\f1\fs24  \par }\pard \fi-7110\li7110\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright {\f1\fs24 dbEST\tab \tab 42\tab \tab 13\tab \tab 6\tab \tab 61\par NR\tab \tab \tab 47\tab \tab 6\tab \tab 11\tab \tab 64\par dbEST and NR}{\f1\fs24\super a}{\f1\fs24 \tab 12\tab \tab 1\tab \tab 2\tab \tab 15\par dbEST or NR}{\f1\fs24\super b}{\f1\fs24 \tab \tab 77\tab \tab 18\tab \tab 15\tab \tab 110\par }\pard \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright {\f1\fs24 ___________________________________________________________\tab \tab \par }{\f1\fs24\super a}{\f1\fs24  Number of matches that were overlapping between the dbEST and NR databases.\par }{\f1\fs24\super b}{\f1\fs24  Number of unique matches in the combined databases.\par }{\f1\fs16 \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \par \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab }{\f1\fs24 \par }\pard \nowidctlpar\adjustright {\fs24 \page \sect }\sectd \marglsxn1350\margtsxn630\margbsxn1170\sbknone\linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl \pard\plain \sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\b\f1\fs24 \par }{\f1\fs24 References\par }\pard \fi-630\li630\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright {\field{\*\fldinst {\fs24  MACROBUTTON endnote+.bib }{\f1\fs24 Aitman TJ, Hearne CM, McAleer MA, Todd JA (1991). Mononucleotide repeats are an abundant source of length variants in mouse genomic DNA. Mammalian Genome. 1, 206-10.\par Boguski MS, Lowe TM, Tolstoshev CM (1993). dbEST--database for "expressed sequence tags". Nature Genetics. 4, 332-3.\par Dietrich W, Katz H, Lincoln SE, Shin HS, Friedman J, Dracopoli NC, Lander ES (1992). A genetic map of the mouse suitable for typing intraspecific crosses. Genetics. 131, 423-47.\par }\pard \fi-1350\li630\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright {\f1\fs24 Hearne CM, McAleer MA, Love JM, Aitman TJ, Cornall RJ, Ghosh S, Knight AM, Prins JB, Todd JA (1991). Additional microsatellite markers for mouse genome mapping. Mammalian Genome. 1, 273-82.\par }\pard \fi-630\li630\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright {\f1\fs24 Love JM, Knight AM, McAleer MA, Todd JA (1990). Towards construction of a high resolution map of the mouse genome using PCR-analysed microsatellites. Nucleic Acids Research. 18, 4123-30.\par Pearson WR, Lipman DJ (1988). Improved tools for biological sequence comparison. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 85, 2444-8.\par Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S, Scharf SJ, Higuchi R, Horn GT, Mullis KB, Erlich HA (1988).  Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA with a thermostable DNA. Science. 239, 487-91.\par Tautz D (1989).  Hypervariability of simple sequences as a general source for polymorphic. Nucleic Acids Research. 17, 6463-71.}}{\fldrslt }}\pard\plain \fi-630\li630\sl480\slmult0\nowidctlpar\tx-1200\tx-720\tx0\tx720\tx1620\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\tx9360\tx10080\tx10800\tx11520\tx12240\adjustright \fs20\cgrid {\f1\fs24 \tab  }{\par }}